"Violence breeds misery; [1] look at people quarreling. I will relate the emotion agitating me.

"Having seen people struggling and contending with each other like fish in a small amount of water, fear entered me. The world is everywhere insecure, every direction is in turmoil; desiring an abode for myself I did not find one uninhabited. [2] When I saw contention as the sole outcome, aversion increased in me; but then I saw an arrow [3] here, difficult to see, set in the heart. Pierced by it, once runs in every direction, but having pulled it out one does not run nor does one sink. [4]

1
"Here follows the rule of training:

"Whatever are worldly fetters, may you not be bound by them! Completely break down sensual desires and practice so as to realize Nibbána for yourself!

"A sage should be truthful, not arrogant, not deceitful, not given to slandering others, and should be without anger. He should remove the evil of attachment and wrongly directed longing; he should conquer drowsiness, lassitude and sloth, and not dwell in indolence. A man whose mind is set on Nibbána should not be arrogant. He should not lapse into untruth nor generate love for sense objects. He should thoroughly understand the nature of conceit and abstain from violence. He should not delight in what is past, nor be fond of what is new, nor sorrow for what is disappearing, nor crave for the attractive.

"Greed, I say, is a great flood; it is a whirlpool sucking one down, a constant yearning, seeking a hold, continually in movement; [5] difficult to cross is the morass of sensual desire. A sage does not deviate from truth, a brahmana [6] stands on firm ground; renouncing all, he is truly called 'calmed.'

"Having actually experienced and understood the Dhamma he has realized the highest knowledge and is independent. [7] He comports himself correctly in the world and does not envy anyone here. He who has left behind sensual pleasures, an attachment difficult to leave behind, does not grieve nor have any longing; has cut across the stream and is unfettered.

"Dry out that which is past, [8] let there be nothing for you in the future. [9] If you do not grasp at anything in the present you will go about at peace. One who, in regard to this entire mind-body complex, has no cherishing of it as 'mine,' and who does not grieve for what is non-existent truly suffers no loss in the world. For him there is no thought of anything as 'this is mine' or 'this is another's'; not finding any state of ownership, and realizing, 'nothing is mine,' he does not grieve.

"To be not callous, not greedy, at rest and unruffled by circumstances -- that is the profitable result I proclaim when asked about one who does not waver. For one who does not crave, who has understanding, there is no production of new kamma. [10] Refraining from initiating new kamma he sees security everywhere. A sage does not speak in terms of being equal, lower or higher. Calmed and without selfishness he neither grasps nor rejects."



I have heard that on one occasion the Blessed One was staying near Rajagaha in the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels' Sanctuary. Then the Brahmin Akkosaka ("Insulter") Bharadvaja heard that a Brahmin of the Bharadvaja clan had gone forth from the home life into homelessness in the presence of the Blessed One. Angered and displeased, he went to the Blessed One and, on arrival, insulted and cursed him with rude, harsh words.

When this was said, the Blessed One said to him: "What do you think, Brahmin: Do friends and colleagues, relatives and kinsmen come to you as guests?"

"Yes, Master Gautama, sometimes friends and colleagues, relatives and kinsmen come to me as guests."

"And what do you think: Do you serve them with staple and non-staple foods and delicacies?"

"Yes, sometimes I serve them with staple and non-staple foods and delicacies."

"And if they don't accept them, to whom do those foods belong?"

"If they don't accept them, Master Gautama, those foods are all mine."

"In the same way, Brahmin, that with which you have insulted me, who is not insulting; that with which you have taunted me, who is not taunting; that with which you have berated me, who is not berating: that I don't accept from you. It's all yours, Brahmin. It's all yours.

"Whoever returns insult to one who is insulting, returns taunts to one who is taunting, returns a berating to one who is berating, is said to be eating together, sharing company, with that person. But I am neither eating together nor sharing your company, Brahmin. It's all yours. It's all yours."

"The king together with his court know this of Master Gautama -- 'Gautama the contemplative is an arhat' -- and yet still Master Gautama gets angry." [1]

[The Buddha:]

Whence is there anger
for one free from anger,
 tamed,
 living in tune --
one released through right knowing,
calmed
 and Such.

You make things worse
when you flare up
at someone who's angry.
Whoever doesn't flare up
at someone who's angry
wins a battle
 hard to win.

You live for the good of both
    -- your own, the other's --
when, knowing the other's provoked,
you mindfully grow calm.

When you work the cure of both
    -- your own, the other's --
those who think you a fool
know nothing of Dhamma.

When this was said, the Brahmin Akkosaka Bharadvaja said to the Blessed One, "Magnificent, Master Gautama! Magnificent! Just as if he were to place upright what had been overturned, were to reveal what was hidden, were to show the way to one who was lost, or were to hold up a lamp in the dark so that those with eyes could see forms, in the same way Master Gautama has -- through many lines of reasoning -- made the Dhamma clear. I go to the Blessed One for refuge, to the Dhamma, and to the community of monks. Let me obtain the going forth in Master Gautama’s presence, let me obtain admission."

Then the Brahmin Akkosaka Bharadvaja received the going forth and the admission in the Blessed One's presence. And not long after his admission -- dwelling alone, secluded, heedful, ardent, and resolute -- he in no long time reached and remained in the supreme goal of the holy life, for which clansmen rightly go forth from home into homelessness, knowing and realizing it for himself in the here and now. He knew: "Birth is ended, the holy life fulfilled, the task done. There is nothing further for the sake of this world." And so Ven. Bharadvaja became another one of the Arhats.

Then Anathapindika the householder went to the Blessed One and, on arrival, having bowed down to him, sat to one side. As he was sitting there the Blessed One said to him: "There are these four kinds of bliss that can be attained in the proper season, on the proper occasions, by a householder enjoying the pleasures of the senses. Which four? The bliss of having, the bliss of making use of wealth, the bliss of debtless-ness, the bliss of blamelessness.

"And what is the bliss of having? There is the case where the son of a good family has wealth earned through his efforts and enterprise, amassed through the strength of his arm, and piled up through the sweat of his brow, righteous wealth righteously gained. When he thinks, 'I have wealth earned through my efforts and enterprise, amassed through the strength of my arm, and piled up through the sweat of my brow, righteous wealth righteously gained,' he experiences bliss, he experiences joy. This is called the bliss of having.

"And what is the bliss of making use of wealth? There is the case where the son of a good family, using the wealth earned through his efforts and enterprise, amassed through the strength of his arm, and piled up through the sweat of his brow, righteous wealth righteously gained, partakes of his wealth and makes merit. When he thinks, 'Using the wealth earned through my efforts and enterprise, amassed through the strength of my arm, and piled up through the sweat of my brow, righteous wealth righteously gained, I partake of wealth and make merit,' he experiences bliss, he experiences joy. This is called the bliss of making use of wealth.

"And what is the bliss of debtless-ness? There is the case where the son of a good family owes no debt, great or small, to anyone at all. When he thinks, 'I owe no debt, great or small, to anyone at all,' he experiences bliss, he experiences joy. This is called the bliss of debtless-ness.

"And what is the bliss of blamelessness? There is the case where a disciple of the noble ones is endowed with blameless bodily kamma, blameless verbal kamma, blameless mental kamma. When he thinks, 'I am endowed with blameless bodily kamma, blameless verbal kamma, blameless mental kamma,' he experiences bliss, he experiences joy. This is called the bliss of blamelessness.

"These are the four kinds of bliss that can be attained in the proper season, on the proper occasions, by a householder enjoying the pleasures of the senses."

Knowing the bliss of debtless-ness,
and recollecting the bliss of having,
enjoying the bliss of wealth, the mortal
then sees clearly with discernment.
Seeing clearly -- the wise one --
 he knows both sides:
that these are not worth one sixteenth-sixteenth
 of the bliss of blamelessness.

 Thus have I heard:

On one occasion the Blessed One was living at Savatthi in Jeta’s Grove, Anathapindika’s Park. There the venerable Shariputra addressed the Monks thus, "Friends, Monks." – "Friend," they replied. The venerable Shariputra said this,

"Friends, there are these four kinds of persons found existing in the world. What four? Here some person with a blemish does not understand it as it actually is thus, ‘I have a blemish in myself.’ Here some person with a blemish understands it as it actually is thus, ‘I have a blemish in myself.’ Here some person with no blemish does not understand it as it actually is thus, ‘I have no blemish in myself.’ Here some person with no blemish understands it as it actually is thus, ‘I have no blemish in myself.’

"Herein, the person with a blemish who does not understand it as it actually is thus, ‘I have a blemish in myself’ is called the inferior of the two persons with a blemish. Herein, the person with a blemish who understands it as it actually is thus, ‘I have a blemish in myself’ is called the superior of these two persons with a blemish.

"Herein, the person with no blemish who does not understand it as it actually is thus, ‘I have no blemish’ is called the inferior of these two persons with no blemish. Herein, the person with no blemish who understands it as it actually is thus, ‘I have no blemish’ is called the superior of these two persons with no blemish."

When this was said, the venerable Maha Moggallana asked the venerable Shariputra, "Friend Shariputra, what is the cause and reason why, of these two persons with a blemish, one is called the inferior man and one is called the superior man? What is the cause and reason why, of these two persons with no blemish, one is called the inferior man and one is called the superior man?"

"Herein, friend, when a person with a blemish does not understand it as it is thus, ‘I have a blemish in myself,’ it can be expected that he will not arouse zeal, make effort, or instigate energy to abandon that blemish, and that he will die with lust, hate, and delusion, with a blemish, with mind defiled. Suppose a bronze dish were brought from a shop or a smithy covered with dirt and stains, and the owners neither used it nor had it cleaned, but put it away in a dusty corner. Would the bronze dish thus get more defiled and stained later on?" – "Yes, friend." – "So too, Friend, when a person with a blemish does not understand it as it is actually thus, ‘I have a blemish in myself,’ it can be expected that he will not arouse zeal, make effort, or instigate energy to abandon that blemish, and that he will die with lust, hate, and delusion, with a blemish, with mind defiled.

"Herein, when a person with a blemish understands it as it actually is thus, ‘I have a blemish in myself,’ it can be expected that he will arouse zeal, make effort, instigate energy to abandon that blemish, and that he will die without lust, hate, and delusion, without blemish, with mind undefiled. Suppose a bronze dish were brought from a shop or a smithy covered with dirt and stains, and the owners had cleaned it and did not put it in a dusty corner. Would the bronze dish get cleaner and brighter later on?" – "Yes, Friend." – "So too, friend, when a person with a blemish understands it as it actually is thus, ‘I have a blemish in myself,’ it can be expected that he will arouse zeal, make effort, instigate energy to abandon that blemish, and that he will die without lust, hate, and delusion, without blemish, with mind undefiled.

"Herein, when a person with no blemish does not understand it as it is actually thus, ‘I have no blemish in myself,’ it can be expected that he will give attention to the sign of the beautiful, that by his doing so lust will infect his mind, and that he will die with lust, hate, and delusion, with a blemish, with mind defiled. Suppose a bronze dish were brought from a shop or smithy clean and bright, and the owners neither used it nor had it cleaned, but put it in a dusty corner. Would the bronze dish thus get more defiled and more stained later on?" – "Yes, friend." – "So too, friend, when a person with no blemish does not understand it as it is actually thus, ‘I have no blemish in myself,’ it can be expected that he will give attention to the sign of the beautiful, that by his doing so lust will infect his mind, and that he will die with lust, hate, and delusion, with a blemish, with mind defiled.

"Herein, when a person with no blemish understands it as it actually is thus, ‘I have no blemish in myself,’ it can be expected that he will not give attention to the sign of the beautiful, that by his not doing so lust will not infect his mind, and that he will die without lust, hate, and delusion, without blemish, with mind undefiled. Suppose a bronze dish were brought from a shop or smithy clean and bright, and the owners used it and had it cleaned, and did not put it in a dusty corner. Would the bronze dish thus get cleaner and brighter later on?" – "Yes, friend." – "So too, friend, when a person with no blemish understands it as it is actually thus, ‘I have no blemish in myself,’ it can be expected that he will not give attention to the sign of the beautiful, that by his doing so lust will not infect his mind, and that he will die without lust, hate, and delusion, with no blemish, with mind undefiled.

"This is the cause and reason why, of these two persons with a blemish, one is called the inferior man and one is called the superior man. This is the cause and reason why, of these two persons with no blemish, one is called the inferior man and one is called the superior man.

"Blemish, blemish, is said friend, but what is this word Blemish a term for?"

"Blemish, friend, is a term for the spheres of evil unwholesome wishes.

"It is possible that a Monk here might wish, ‘If I commit an offence, let the Monks not know that I have committed an offence.’ And it is possible that the Monks come to know that that Monk has committed an offence. So he is angry and bitter thus, ‘The Monks know that I have committed an offence.’ The anger and bitterness are both a blemish.

"It is possible that a Monk here might wish, ‘I have committed an offence, the monks should admonish me in private, not in the midst of the Sangha.’ And it is possible that the monks admonish that monk in the midst of the Sangha, not in private. So he is angry and bitter thus, ‘The monks admonished me in the midst of the Sangha, not in private.’ The anger and bitterness are both a blemish.

"It is possible that a monk here might wish, ‘I have committed an offence. A person who is my equal should admonish me, not a person who is not my equal.’ And it is possible that a person not his equal admonishes him, not a person his equal. So he is angry and bitter thus, ‘A person not my equal admonishes me, not a person my equal.’ The anger and bitterness are both a blemish.

"It is possible that a monk here might wish, ‘O that the teacher might teach the Dhamma to the monks by asking a series of questions of me, not of some other monk!’ And it is possible the teacher teaches the Dhamma to the monks by asking a series of questions of some other monk, not of that monk. So he is angry and bitter thus, ‘The teacher teaches the Dhamma to the monks by asking a series of questions of some other monk, not of me!’ The anger and bitterness are both a blemish.

"It is possible that a monk here might wish, ‘O that the monks might enter a village for alms putting me in the forefront not some other monk!’ And it is possible that the monks enter a village for alms putting some other monk in the forefront, not that monk. So he is angry and bitter thus, ‘The monks enter the village for alms putting some other monk in the forefront, not me!’ The anger and bitterness are both a blemish.

"It is possible that a monk here might wish, ‘O that I might get the best seat, the best water, the best alms food in the monastery, not some other monk!’ And it is possible that some other monk gets the best seat, the best water, and the best alms food in the monastery, not that monk. So he is angry and bitter thus, ‘Some other monk got the best seat, the best water, and the best alms food in the monastery, not me!’ The anger and bitterness are both a blemish.

"It is possible that a monk here might wish, ‘O that I might give the blessing in the monastery after the meal, not some other monk!’ And it is possible that some other monk gives the blessing, not that monk. So he is angry and bitter thus, ‘Some other monk gave the blessing in the monastery after the meal, not me!’ The anger and bitterness are both a blemish.

"It is possible that a monk here might wish, ‘O that I might teach the Dhamma to the monks, that I might teach the Dhamma to the nuns, that I might teach the Dhamma to the men lay followers, that I might teach the Dhamma to the women lay followers, not some other monk.’ And it is possible that some other monk teaches the Dhamma to the monks and nuns, laymen and laywomen. So he is angry and bitter thus, ‘Some other monk gives the teachings to the monks, nuns, laymen and laywomen, not me!’ The anger and bitterness are both a blemish.

"It is possible that a monk here might wish, ‘O that the monks, nuns, laymen and laywomen might honor, respect, revere and venerate me, not some other monk.’ And it is possible that they honor, respect, revere and venerate some other monk, not that monk. So he is angry and bitter thus, "Some other monk gets the honor, respect, reverence, and veneration, not me!’ The anger and bitterness are both a blemish.

"It is possible that a monk here might wish, ‘O that I might be the one to get a superior robe, superior alms food, a superior resting place, superior medicinal requisites, not some other monk!’ And it is possible that some other monk is the one to get a superior robe, superior alms food, a superior resting place and superior medicinal requisites, not that monk. So he is angry and bitter thus, ‘Another monk has received a superior robe, superior alms food, a superior resting place, and superior medicinal requisites, not me!’ The anger and the bitterness are both a blemish. Blemish, friend, is a term for the spheres of these evil, unwholesome wishes.

"If the spheres of these evil, unwholesome wishes are seen and heard to be un-abandoned in any monk, then for all that he may be a forest dweller, a frequenter of remote abodes, an alms food eater, a house to house seeker, a refuse rag wearer, a wearer of rough robes, still his fellows in the holy life do not honor, respect, revere, and venerate him. Why is that? Because the spheres of these evil unwholesome wishes are seen and heard to be un-abandoned in that venerable one.

"Suppose a metal bowl were brought from a shop or a smithy, clean and bright; and the owners put the carcass of a snake or a dog or a human being in it and, covering it with another bowl, went back to the market; then people seeing it said, ‘What is that you are carrying about like a treasure?’ Then, raising the lid and uncovering it, they looked in, and as soon as they saw they were inspired with such loathing, repugnance, and disgust, that even those who were hungry would not want to eat, not to speak of those who were full.

"So too if the spheres of these evil unwholesome wishes are seen and heard to be un-abandoned in any monk, then for all that he may be a forest dweller, a frequenter of remote abodes, an alms food eater, a house to house seeker, a refuse rag wearer, a wearer of rough robes, still his fellows in the holy life do not honor, respect, revere, and venerate him. Why is that? Because the spheres of these evil unwholesome wishes are seen and heard to be un-abandoned in that venerable one.

"If the spheres of these evil unwholesome wishes are seen and heard to be abandoned in any monk, then for all that he may be a village dweller, an accepter of invitations, a wearer of robes given him by householders, yet his fellows in the holy life honor, respect, revere and venerate him. Why is that? Because the spheres of these evil unwholesome wishes are seen and heard to be abandoned in that venerable one.

"Suppose a metal bow were brought from a shop or a smithy, clean and bright; and the owners put clean boiled rice and various soups and sauces into it, and covering it with another bowl went back to the market; then people seeing it said, , ‘What is that you are carrying about like a treasure?’ Then, raising the lid and uncovering it they looked in, and as soon as they saw they were inspired with such liking, appetite, and relish, that even those who were full would want to eat, not to speak of those who were hungry. So too, friend, If the spheres of these evil unwholesome wishes are seen and heard to be abandoned in any monk, then for all that he may be a village dweller, an accepter of invitations, a wearer of robes given him by householders, yet his fellows in the holy life honor, respect, revere and venerate him. Why is that? Because the spheres of these evil unwholesome wishes are seen and heard to be abandoned in that venerable one.

When this was said, the Venerable Maha Moggallana said to the Venerable Shariputra, "A simile occurs to me friend Shariputra." – "State it friend Moggallana."

"On one occasion, friend, I was living at the Hill Fort at Rajagaha. Then, when it was morning, I dressed, and taking my bowl and outer robe, I went into Rajagaha for alms. Now on that occasion Samiti, the Cartwright’s Son, was smoothing a beam of wood and the Ajivaka [A rival sect that practices severe austerities and believed in the concept of fate.] Panduputta, son of a former Cartwright was standing by. Then this thought arose in the Ajivaka Panduputta’s mind, ‘O that this Samiti, the Cartwright Son might plane this bend, this twist, this fault out of the wood so that it would be without bends, twists, or faults and come to consist purely of heartwood.’ And just as this thought came to pass in his mind so did Samiti, the Cartwright’s Son plane that bend, that twist, that fault, out of the wood. Then the Ajivaka Panduputta, son of a former Cartwright was glad and he voiced his gladness thus, ‘He planes just as if he knew my heart with his heart!’

"So too friend, there are persons who are faithless and have gone forth from the home life into homelessness not out of faith, but seeking a livelihood, who are fraudulent, deceitful, treacherous, haughty, hollow, personally vain, rough tongued, loose spoken, unguarded in the sense faculties, immoderate in eating, un-devoted to wakefulness, unconcerned with recluse-ship, not greatly respectful of training, luxurious, careless, leaders in backsliding, neglectful of seclusion, lazy, wanting in energy, unmindful, not fully aware, un-concentrated, with straying minds, devoid of wisdom, drivellers. The venerable Shariputra with his discourse on the Dhamma planes out their faults just as if he knew my heart with his heart!"

1
"But there are clansmen who have gone forth out of faith from the home life into homelessness, who are not fraudulent, deceitful, treacherous, haughty, hollow, personally vain, rough tongued, or loose spoken; who are guarded in their sense faculties, moderate in eating, devoted to wakefulness, concerned with recluse-ship, greatly respectful of training, not luxurious or careless, who are keen to avoid backsliding, leaders in seclusion, energetic, resolute, established in mindfulness, fully aware, concentrated, with unified minds, possessing wisdom, not drivellers. These, on hearing the venerable Shariputra’s discourse on the Dhamma drink it in and eat it as it were by word and thought. Good indeed it is that he makes his fellows in the holy life emerge from the unwholesome and establish themselves in the wholesome.

"Just as a woman or a man, young, youthful, fond of adornments, with head bathed, having received a garland of lotuses, jasmine, or roses would take it with both hands and place it on the head, so too there are clansmen who have gone forth out of faith from the home life into homelessness who are not fraudulent, deceitful, treacherous, haughty, hollow, personally vain, rough tongued, or loose spoken; who are guarded in their sense faculties, moderate in eating, devoted to wakefulness, concerned with recluse-ship, greatly respectful of training, not luxurious or careless, who are keen to avoid backsliding, leaders in seclusion, energetic, resolute, established in mindfulness, fully aware, concentrated, with unified minds, possessing wisdom, not drivellers. These, on hearing the venerable Shariputra discourse on the Dhamma drink it in and eat it as it were by word and thought. Good indeed it is that he makes his fellows in the holy life emerge from the unwholesome and establish himself in the wholesome."

Thus it was that these two great beings rejoiced in each others good words.


Staying at Savatthi. "Monks, there once was a time when the Dasarahas had a large drum called 'Summoner.' Whenever Summoner was split, the Dasarahas inserted another peg in it, until the time came when Summoner's original wooden body had disappeared and only a conglomeration of pegs remained. [1]

"In the same way, in the course of the future there will be monks who won't listen when discourses that are words of the Tathágata -- deep, deep in their meaning, transcendent, connected with emptiness -- are being recited. They won't lend ear, won't set their hearts on knowing them, won't regard these teachings as worth grasping or mastering. But they will listen when discourses that are literary works -- the works of poets, elegant in sound, elegant in rhetoric, the work of outsiders, words of disciples -- are recited. They will lend ear and set their hearts on knowing them. They will regard these teachings as worth grasping and mastering.

"In this way the disappearance of the discourses that are words of the Tathágata -- deep, deep in their meaning, transcendent, connected with emptiness -- will come about.

"Thus you should train yourselves: 'We will listen when discourses that are words of the Tathágata -- deep, deep in their meaning, transcendent, connected with emptiness -- are being recited. We will lend ear, will set our hearts on knowing them, will regard these teachings as worth grasping and mastering.' That's how you should train yourselves."



I heard thus:

At one time the Blessed One was living in the monastery offered by Anathapindika in Jeta’s grove in Savatthi. The Blessed One addressed the Bhikkhus from there.’ Bhikkhus, Shariputra is wise, has wide wisdom, bright intelligence, spontaneous and sharp wisdom and penetrating wisdom. Shariputra concentrates a fortnight uninterrupted, secluded from sensual desires and thoughts of demerit, with thoughts and thought processes and with joy and pleasantness born of seclusion abides in the first jhana. These things of the first jhana such as thoughts, thought processes, joy, pleasantness, one pointed-ness of mind, contact, feelings, perceptions, intentions, interest, resolution, effort, mindfulness, equanimity and attention, follow one after the other to him. They rise, persist and fade with his knowledge. He knows, these things come to be and cause feelings to rise. When these things follow one after the other, he abides with a mind that does not settle, is not bound, is released and unyoked and is unrestricted. knows there is an escape beyond this. With much practice they come to him.

Again, Bhikkhus, Shariputra, overcoming thoughts and thought processes, the mind internally appeased in one point, with joy and pleasantness born of concentration abides in the second jhana. These things of the second jhana such as internal appeasement, joy, pleasantness, one pointed ness of mind, contact, feelings, perceptions, intentions, interest, resolution, effort, mindfulness, equanimity and attention, follow one after the other, to him. They rise, persist and fade with his knowledge. He knows, these things come to be and cause feelings to rise. When these things follow one after the other, he abides with a mind that does not settle, is not bound, is released and unyoked and is unrestricted. knows there is an escape beyond this. With much practice they come to him.

Again, Bhikkhus, Shariputra, with equanimity to joy and detachment abides mindful and aware, and with the body experiences pleasantness too and abides in the third jhana. The noble ones say it’s abiding in pleasantness mindfully. These things of the third jhana such as equanimity, pleasantness, mindful awareness, one pointed-ness of mind, contact, feelings, perceptions, intentions, interest, resolution, effort, equanimity and attention, follow one after the other to him. They rise, persist and fade with his knowledge. He knows, these things come to be and cause feelings to rise. When these things follow one after the other, he abides with a mind that does not settle, is not bound, is released unyoked and unrestricted. knows there is an escape beyond this. With much practice they come to him.

Again, Bhikkhus, Shariputra, dispelling pleasantness and unpleasantness, earlier having overcome pleasure and displeasure purifying mindfulness with equanimity abides in the fourth jhana These things of the fourth jhana such as equanimity, neither unpleasant nor pleasant feelings, observed feelings not enjoyed, purified mindfulness, one pointed ness of mind, contact, feelings, perceptions, intentions, interest, resolution, effort, equanimity and attention, follow one after the other to him. They rise, persist and fade with his knowledge. He knows, these things come to be and cause feelings to rise. When these things follow one after the other, he abides with a mind that does not settle, is not bound, is released and unyoked and is unrestricted. knows there is an escape beyond this. With much practice they come to him.

Again, Bhikkhus, Shariputra, overcoming all perceptions, of matter and anger, not attending to various perceptions, with space is boundless attains to the sphere of space. Those things of the sphere of space such as the perception of space, one pointed-ness of mind, contact, feelings, perceptions, intentions, interest, resolution, effort, equanimity and attention, follow one after the other to him. They rise, persist and fade with his knowledge. He knows, these things come to be and cause feelings to rise. When these things follow one after the other, he abides with a mind that does not settle, is not bound, is released unyoked and unrestricted. knows there is an escape beyond this. With much practice they come to him.

Again, Bhikkhus, Shariputra, overcoming all perceptions of space with consciousness is boundless attains to the sphere of consciousness. Those things of the sphere of consciousness such as the perception of consciousness, one pointed-ness of mind, contact, feelings, perceptions, intentions, interest, resolution, effort, equanimity and attention, follow one after the other. They rise, persist and fade with his knowledge. He knows, these things come to be and cause feelings to rise. When these things follow one after the other, he abides with a mind that does not settle, is not bound, is released and unyoked and is unrestricted knows there is an escape beyond this. With much practice they come to him.

Again, Bhikkhus, Shariputra, overcoming all perceptions of consciousness with there is nothing attains to the sphere of nothingness. Those things of the sphere of nothingness such as the perception of nothingness, one pointed-ness of mind, contact, feelings, perceptions, intentions, interest, resolution, effort, equanimity and attention, follow one after the other to him. They rise, persist and fade with his knowledge. He knows, these things come to be and cause feelings to rise. When these things follow one after the other, he abides with a mind that does not settle, is not bound, is released, unyoked and unrestricted knows there is an escape beyond this. With much practice they come to him.

Again, Bhikkhus, Shariputra, overcoming all perceptions of nothingness attains to the sphere of neither perception nor non-perception. He mindfully rises from that attainment and reflects the things, that have passed away ceased and changed. He knows, these things come to be and cause feelings to rise. When these things follow one after the other, he abides with a mind that does not settle, is not bound, is released and unyoked and unrestricted. knows there is an escape beyond this. With much practice they come to him.

Again, Bhikkhus, Shariputra, overcoming all the sphere of neither perception nor non perception attains the cessation of perceptions and feelings. Seeing it with wisdom his desires get destroyed. He mindfully rises from that attainment and reflects the things, that have passed away ceased and changed. He knows, these things come to be and cause feelings to rise. When these things follow one after the other, he abides with a mind that does not settle, is not bound, is released unyoked and unrestricted knows there is nothing beyond this. With much practice nothing comes to him.

Bhikkhus, saying it rightly, it is Shariputra that has mastered and completed the noble ones’ virtues, mastered and completed the noble ones’ concentration, mastered and completed the noble ones’ perception, mastered and completed the noble ones’ release. Saying it rightly it is only Shariputra that has mastered and completed the noble ones’ virtues, concentration, wisdom and release.

Bhikkhus, saying it rightly, he is the Blessed One’s own son born of the mouth, born of the Teaching, the sign of the Teaching, the heritage of the Teaching and not one born from the heritage of material.

Bhikkhus, Shariputra follows rolling the noble wheel of the Teaching, rightfully rolled by the Thus Gone One.

The Blessed One said thus and those Bhikkhus delighted in the words of the Blessed One.
